This is an interview with Mr. Billy Pete
Huddleston by Dwayne Purvis on May the 6th at the
Petroleum Engineering Building at Texas A&M. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge, I am
asking you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas
A&M Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is that all right with you? That will be
fine. All right. Let's talk a little bit about your
background. Were you born and raised? I was born in
a small West Texas town of Ira Ann, I-R-A-A-N. It
was named after Ira and Ann Yates. Ira Ann also
happens to be about the center of the Yates oil
field, which is one of the largest oil fields in the
North American continent, and still has the well
that tested at the highest flow rate that's ever
been tested in the North American continent, over
250,000 barrels per day. That's incredible. So
you grew up around there a little? I grew up in the
field itself. I was actually born in an oil field
camp in what they call their nurse's quarters,
delivered by an oil field lady that was called a
midwife that delivered all the children in the
camp. In fact, I've got a photograph of the 82
children that she delivered in that one oil field
camp. busy camp. Yeah, right. Then you went to A&M
for your undergraduate? I graduated from RN High
School in 1952. I came to A&M on a football
scholarship and studied petroleum engineering.
I took some additional courses and graduated in
five years. I ended up with 180 hours, but it was all
in undergraduate work. I was not doing any
graduate work at all. I'd worked in the summers
beginning when I was 12 years old and pulling
units, which is oil field equipment. By the time I
was 15, I'd graduated to working on rotary rigs,
and so I worked as a roughneck until I graduated
from A&M. And I worked myself up as a relief
driller, which is the highest position that you
could get on the last summer that I worked prior to
graduation. What year did you graduate? I
graduated from A&M in 1957. I was employed by
Marathon Oil Company. I started in East Texas,
went to Mississippi, North Louisiana, Arkansas.
Someplace in there, I had a two-year leave of
absence. I served in a fighter interceptor
squadron with the Air Defense Command in the
United States. I was stationed in Massachusetts
on Cape Cod, later at an Air Force base in Roswell,
New Mexico. I went back to Marathon. I worked for
them at South Louisiana, Texas Gulf Coast, and
South Texas. I resigned from Marathon in 1965. I
was 30 years old and formed my own business. Farmed
Huddleston Company. It's consulting petroleum
engineers.
Had a lot of work almost immediately. Farm grew
somewhat slowly. 1971, I formed Peter Paul
Petroleum Company that still exists today.
Principal partner in Peter Paul Petroleum
Company is Princeton University Endowment Fund.
We manage for our joint accounts, about $100
million worth of oil and gas properties. So we're
very active. Good. You're very active in small
fields? Mostly small fields. We do not
participate in offshore. We don't do deep
drilling. But we do drill a good many wells. But
rarely do we drill below 12,000 feet. And we do not
drill anything offshore. OK. Looking back to
1965, what was the condition of the industry
Condition in the industry was quite depressed.
The reason that I left Marathon, it was strange, I
actually was promoted. I was a district reservoir
engineer at Bay City, Texas, and I had been
promoted to the international reservoir
engineer, which was a giant promotion for me.
Unfortunately, that job was located in New York
City. and so i resigned in those days if you did not
accept a promotion with the company then you were
essentially going to be stagnant so i resigned
moved to houston i had three small children uh
industry was quite depressed oil was selling for
two dollars and eighty cents a barrel the gas was
selling for 12 14 cents in mcf in fact in 19 69, I
believe, was the lowest number of graduates in
petroleum engineering that we ever had from A&M. I
think we graduated 18 engineers. My graduating
class, by contrast, we had 73 in my graduating
class. 73 in the 50s? In petroleum engineering.
Wow. So the market continued to be bad for several
years? The market was, the industry was very
depressed until 1973. Why was it depressed until
73? There was an excess supply of oil. In fact, in
the early 60s, there was so much excess oil that the
Texas Railroad Commission prorated or limited
the amount of production that could be produced.
And they called it so many producing days. We got
down as low as you could only produce eight days a
month. and your wells had to be shut in the other 22
days a month. Actually, they would let you prorate
over the entire period, but you could only produce
it like 25, 26% of what the well was capable of
producing. Was there no proration before the
1960s? No, there was proration, but we just had
ended up with an excess, more and more excess oil.
And so in order to keep the price from just
absolutely going to 10 cents a barrel or
something, then they cut back production and that
stabilized the price. In fact, the Texas Railroad
Commission, although they denied it, was the
first OPEC. They were the first oil cartel all by
themselves. So where was Texas oil coming from? If
Texas was choked back, where was the oil coming
from? Well, even at producing at that level of
production, Texas is 35% of the total oil in the
United States. And so choking Texas back to 25% of
their capability, then we were producing only
enough oil to meet the demand. But 75% of Texas
production was shut in then. And so the industry
was very depressed because we had an excess of oil
and very low prices. a very low income level, and it
stayed that way until 1973 when the Arabs put an
embargo of oil on the United States. What year was
OPEC formed? Well, it probably was formed in, I
don't know, maybe prior to 1970, but they really
did not have any power. I mean, we were importing
probably 40% of our oil, but they actually cut off
All of our supply, OPEC cut off all of our supply in
1973. So before that, so OPEC first exercised its
power in 1973. Before that, it didn't exercise its
power either positively or negatively. That's
correct. Okay. Their first impact was in 1973, and
when they cut off the oil supply, we immediately
had a monstrous gasoline shortage. there would be
sometimes it would take you two or three hours of
waiting in line just to get gasoline and that was
common all over the United States in 1973. Price of
oil immediately went to six dollars a barrel, went
from less than three to over six dollars a barrel.
At that point also Texas had run out of spare
capacity and essentially was up to a hundred
percent of capacity up from, remember they'd had
75% of their production shut in in the late 50s,
early 60s. So Texas was at 100% of capacity. The oil
price had now doubled to $6 a barrel. So we began in
73 to be really good economic years for the
petroleum industry through 1985.
A lot of new companies started in 1973? A lot of
companies. Prior to 1973, we had about 4,000
independent companies. By 1978, we had 12,000
independent companies. Did they go big again?
Well, we stayed at 12,000 until 1986 when the price
of oil broke down dramatically. It came down from
In 1981, it was $37 a barrel. It went down to $27 a
barrel by 85. And then in January of 86, oil went to
$10 to $12 a barrel. And by 1990, the 12,000
independents had gone way down to about 4,000
independents. We're probably about 3,000 today.
How did the strategy of the majors change? Well,
the majors of course increased their drilling
budget dramatically. They began to drill what we
call frontier basins in the United States that
previously had not really been drilled. Some of
these basins were like the deep smack over Norflet
production in Alabama, Mississippi. These are
oil and gas fields that are below 17,000-18,000
feet. They began to drill the deep Anadarko. Why
weren't they drilling gas in 1973? Well, the price
of gas had gone up dramatically, too. Oil went up,
it didn't go up as much as oil, did it? Yes,
percentage-wise, the price of gas in 1967-68
was about 26 cents. By 1971 it had gone up to 75 to 80
cents. Now 73 had gone up to a dollar and a half. So it
went up tenfold in a period of about five, six
years. Why did gas demand go up so much? For a
different reason from oil, is that there we
thought that there was a great glut of gas in the
United States, but beginning in 1971, and there
was a lot of industries, and of course a lot of
residential use of gas, we ran dramatically short
of gas. The price of gas had been controlled solely
by the Federal Power Commission, which is now the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and it was
treated as a utility price, and it was strictly
controlled by the federal government. Drilling
for gas had lagged way behind, and we went
dramatically short of gas. In fact, in the winter
of 71-72,
perhaps 72-73, we had such a shortage of gas that
the University of Texas was actually shut down for
over a week. The city of San Antonio was virtually
shut down for over a week due to gas shortage. So at
that time people were paying a buck and a half for
gas and it was still controlled, still price
controlled? Well there was intrastate gas that
did not flow across the state boundaries, was not
controlled. So as a consequence, very little new
gas was committed to flow across state lines to
like St. Louis or Chicago. and the utilization of
it for a short period of time was solely within the
state to get around cost control.
I see. So, okay, so all embargo hits and everybody
goes drilling. They didn't drill very many
development fields, mostly frontiers? Well, you
were asking about the change in strategy of the
major. Is that? When their drilling budget went up
dramatically, remember their cash flow has now
more than doubled what it has been. And typically
what we use is what we call a plowback ratio, is that
the majors usually plow back about 50% of their
total cash flow into new drilling activity. So
they more than doubled their drilling budget in a
very short period of time. They didn't have enough
development drilling to be able to utilize that
much cash flow. So that's why they started
drilling the deep frontier type of prospects.
Deep Rocky Mountains became very active which had
not seen much activity. Offshore had a tremendous
boom because offshore drilling had been very
expensive. Did this drilling boom affect other
industries in the U.S.? It affected, well,
probably two major industries, the fabricating
business that were building platforms and
equipment, and it affected the service
companies, which is the Halliburton's,
Lumberjays, the people that are servicing the
rigs and furnishing pipe and this type of thing.
How did the employment in the industry change
during the early drilling days? Employment in the
petroleum industry in 1970 was probably around at
the $300,000 mark. By 1975, it had grown to like
$350,000, as I recall.
Something on that order. Not a great change. Not a
great change. Of course, we probably had a surplus
of people actually coming into that. They just put
them to work. Now, then the big buildup, was that by
1981, we went from 350,000 to over 700,000 people.
More than double the employment there in a six year
period. Doesn't sound wise. No, it wasn't. The oil
embargo ended in 74, is that right? It was very
short, a short period of time. Probably ended in
late 73 or early 74. How did strategy change then?
Well, there was A general feeling that we could
drill ourselves, well, I would say this is a
consensus, but a lot of people thought that we
could drill ourselves into what we call an
independent state, that we would not have to
import any oil. I was not one of those people. I
never thought that we had enough reserves in the
United States to become close to becoming
independent. But there was a lot of drilling
activity. A lot of it aimed domestically. The
drilling budgets continued to increase,
probably peaked out in about 1981 or 1982. Oil
price fell back? The oil price peaked in 1981 at $37
a barrel. To a climb from $73 to $81? Consistently,
yes. Even after the embargo ended? Yes. Well, the
reason is that OPEC had the threat of shutback all
the time. And all they had to do was to curtail their
production just a little bit, and they could run
the price of oil up. Total production in the world
is about, even then, was someplace in the low 60
million barrels a day. OPEC controlled 25 million
barrels a day. Texas Railroad Commission had
controlled the price in the 40s, 50s, and 60s. Now
OPEC can control the price by simply shutting back
production the same way the Texas Railroad
Commission did. So everybody was tens and
therefore prices stayed high? Yes. There was
plenty of oil. It was simply the threat of shutting
it back. OPEC could do the same thing today. If
OPEC, that's producing 24 million barrels a day,
were to cut back a million barrels production,
less than 5% of their production, the price of oil
would go over $20 a barrel. It's currently about
$17. They can increase the price of oil
immediately in less than 24 hours. Incredible. So
during this whole time, people are speculating
and keeping prices high? The overwhelming
consensus in the petroleum industry All of the
projections, including the DOE, all of the major
financial houses such as Barrel Lane, Solomon, in
1980 are predicting by the mid-90s that oil will be
$60 a barrel. So budgets were based, built on these
price forecasts. The petroleum industry from
1979 through 1985 overspent what their previous
level of expenditures had been, about $20 million
a year, they overspent $160 billion in
exploration and development. And as a result,
they got nothing for it. Looking over the table of
numbers, I saw two years where there was an
increased reserves and every other year it
declined. Right. The first increase was 1979.
That's the largest increase. It's about 10%. Was
that infield drilling or was that new fields? A lot
of it was infield drilling. Actually, where wells
had been originally drilled on, say, 80-acre
spacing, they came in and drilled them on 40-acre
spacing. But you'll see that there's from 70... it
was 27.1 billion barrels, and they increased it to
80 to 29.8 billion, and essentially after that it
began to decline with little blips in there. But
while you're saying, remember we spent during
that period of time $160 billion extra over our
normal budget. So we're spending a lot more for
almost nothing. Essentially nothing, yeah. I
remember seeing a chart that showed major
oilfield discoveries, fields discovered that
were over 200 million barrels. And as I recall, the
only fields of more than 200 million barrels
discovered in the U.S. after the early 70s were
Alaska. That's correct. So we've gone over the
hump and found basically all the fields in the U.S.
There's no question about that. We may have a few
fields left primarily offshore, and a lot of it in
very deep water, water as deep as 3,000 feet in the
50 to 100 million barrel range. I do not know of any
prospects today onshore that are greater than 25
million barrels. Well, in the time period when
prices were escalating, we were spending more
money on research and development, or not
research, but exploration and development. Was
there anything the government could have done to
keep the price down, or what did it do to keep the
price down? Well, actually, the government
really didn't do much to pricing. They did just the
opposite effect. In 1980,
thereabout, no, early 1973, they essentially put
price controls on oil, in that all of your profit
over a certain level was taxed by what they call a
windfall profits tax up to 70%. For example, they
said, we'll put a base on your oil at $6 a barrel.
When oil went to $20 a barrel, the $14 a barrel was
taxed away from the oil companies at 70%. So they
didn't control the price of oil. They simply taxed
away any excess income. They did not put an excise
tax on gas. They still had price controls on most of
the flowing gas in the United States as late as
1989. It was controlled by the Natural Gas Policy
Act. It was enacted in 1978. There were strict
price controls on gas. What did the 78 Act do? Well,
it put price controls on gas. Which hadn't been
there before? Well, there were different types of
price controls. We had area pricing rates. For
example, in, say, the panhandle of Texas, you
could sell gas for 15 cents. In South Texas, you
could sell it for 14 cents. In 1978, they created
some 20 different categories of gas depending
upon the vintage and the depth. In other words,
Wells Drill prior to 1978 got an old low price, 40
cents. Wells Drill after 1978 got to sell for $2. So
they had a nightmare of pricing. They said they had
some 20 categories of gas. We actually identified
37 different categories of gas. depending on
depth, how close it was to another field, another
well, date drilled, all types of things. So to a
large extent, whatever the government did in
respect to its foreign policy wouldn't have done
that much to change the domestic oil and gas
behavior because international politics didn't
have a lot to do with their profits. Not really. I
guess that they could have had some impact if they
had threatened OPEC, you know, with force or
something. And there was some early on, of course,
there were some rumblings when they put an embargo
on it. So we need to send the army in there and take
over the fields in Saudi Arabia. But I don't think
it had very much support, really. Probably been a
good idea. It sounds nice. So when did, how long was
gas regulation in place? Gas regulation was
effectively in place from 1978 through 1989. All
gas in the United States is now deregulated and
what helped bring that on is that we thought that
there was a tremendous shortage of gas and there
was when they put the increased gas prices in
effect in 1978. There was a big surge in drilling
and by 1982
or three in a very short period of time we had
created a lot of gas reserves and 84 beginning in
late 84 we had what we called a gas bubble we had an
excess of gas supply in the united states so now gas
begins to sell in 1985 below the ceiling prices
that have been brought out to the government in
other words they're not even selling at the
highest price that you could sell for and the gas
price continued to deteriorate from 85 finally in
1989 congress says take all the controls off
because we don't need them there's no gas being
sold at those prices anyway so all gas today is
deregulated so it was a one-step deal it started at
78 and ended in 89 yes tell me about the type of gas
contracts that existed before 1989 uh Actually,
your contracts changed dramatically in 1985 when
we had the excess. Prior to 1985, typically a gas
contract to buy from any well was for a period of 15
to 20 years, some of them for the duration of the
life of the well. When we got to an excess of gas,
then the gas companies that were buying the gas no
longer wanted to be committed to long-term
contracts because they had excess supply. The
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission passed a
regulation that said that the customers were no
longer obligated to honor their purchase
contracts with the gas companies, that they could
buy gas from anybody in the United States,
regardless, even if they had committed
themselves to buy gas from a gas company for 15
years. They set aside those contracts. And the net
effect of that is that it put all gas on what we call
the spot market. And contracts, as we knew them
prior to 1985, were essentially abandoned.
Virtually all gas today is sold on a spot market.
contract to sell your gas every month just for the
next month. Was it better off for the buyers and
better off for the sellers on the spot or on the
long-term contract? Well, the seller, it was
better off on the long-term contract because you
knew what price that you were going to get for a long
period of time. Were they going to get better
prices too? They were going to get better prices
under the contracts, but essentially all of those
contracts have been set aside and court has just
nullified many of them and said that you will sell
your gas on the spot market at a lower price did the
did the sellers sue oh yes there was billions and
billions of dollars of litigation the producers
that had long-term contracts early on won the
lawsuits probably in the first year or so but after
that they've consistently lost what was the
result of that Well, the result of it, of course, is
that it broke a lot of producers that had gone out
and spent a lot of money drilling expensive wells
in anticipation of selling their gas for $3. When
the court sent their contract aside and they had to
sell it for $1, $1.50, they could not pay their bank
debt off that they'd incurred to drill the wells,
and they went broke. The 80s saw a lot of buyouts and
mergers. happen a lot in oil and gas? Yes, there was
a tremendous consolidation in the 80s. Many major
oil companies sold out. Marathon Oil Company sold
out to U.S. Steel. Texas Oil and Gas sold out to U.S.
Steel. Comico was taken over by DuPont. Gulf was
taken over by Chevron. City service was taken over
by Occidental. Would those have happened if gas
had not been deregulated?
Probably. It was inevitable. We had a lot of excess
infrastructure in the petroleum industry, in the
domestic industry. If you go back and look, you can
see that oil production particularly has
declined steadily. So there had to be some
retrenchment. We simply had too much at the top,
frankly, and maybe too many people at the bottom,
too, and so this is what brought about the
consolidations. And we're going to continue to
have consolidations. Were the consolidations
good for the industry?
I would say they were necessary. If you lost your
job, you know, you certainly didn't think it was
good for the industry or good for anything, but
there was just no question because the declining
profitability, there had to be a consolidation.
So in order to survive, to keep any type of
profitability level, there had to be
consolidation. And that probably would have
happened even without deregulation. Yes. You
said a lot of people lost their jobs during the
restructuring? Oh gosh, 350,000 people. We've
lost half of the industry since 1981. Was that
because of restructuring or because of prices? Or
were the two separate? Both. The prices continued
to deteriorate. Production continued to
decline. So obviously in order to keep some level
of profitability, you had to have a whole lot less
people, which is the single most expensive
component in the production of oil and gas. I
remember, back to the gas, which got me into that
idea, I remember hearing that the pipelines were
opened up and made available to every producer
equally. That's correct. When did that happen?
Well, actually, that was Order 636, and it just
happened this last year. There's been a series of
orders, but in effect, The whole structure of the
gas pipeline industry, which is Enron, ANR, Texas
Eastern, Panhandle Eastern, Florida Gas,
Transwestern, El Paso, these are your major
pipeline companies. They had served for many
years prior to just last year's what we call
merchant gas companies in that they went and
signed up a lot of long-term contracts with lots of
producers. They aggregated that gas, and then
they turned around and made long-time sales
contracts with a lot of major industries in a lot of
major cities, Chicago, Detroit, New York,
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and so on. With 636
called the unbundling of services, the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission said that the gas
companies could no longer serve in a merchant
function, that the end users of gas could contact
the producer or any gas sales and buy gas directly
from them and the gas pipeline that was hooked up to
those wells was obligated to transport that gas to
the customer. Now they could charge a
transportation fee but at that point we no longer
had merchant gas companies and essentially
you've had producers selling directly to end
users now. So were the Were the merchant gas
transporters held liable for violation of
contract? Oh, yes. They lost early on when the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission first took
the position that the end user, the customer, no
longer had to satisfy their purchase contracts.
They said, you're excused out of buying this gas,
even though you've got 15 years left on it. The
pipelines were not excused from their contracts
from the producer. To buy. To buy. So there they had
gone out and bought billions of dollars worth of
gas under long-term contract, and they had no
customer on the other end that was obligated to buy
it. So did we lose a lot of gas transporters? We
didn't lose. any gas transporters but they lost
billions and billions of dollars columbia for
example the major gas transmission line is in
bankruptcy today transco came very close to
bankruptcy the and the gas companies
consistently lost their cases fighting the
contracts in court with the producers in the early
years in the last four or five years they've had a
lot more success but they're still losing cases
still losing cases so are these are Were they able
to make a surcharge to the user to help pay for their
indebtedness? No. They simply said the end user
does not have to buy the gas anymore. They can buy it
any place if they find it cheaper. But when the
pipeline said, OK, we'll pass the second rule that
lets us out of our contracts with the producer, the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission told them,
that's your problem. So why were the gas
transporters the one that took the hit? Well,
nobody really knows. Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission only addressed half of the problem and
refused to address the other half of the problem.
No understanding why? No. They just said, that's
not our problem. Our problem is to protect the end
user. And that's between the producer and the
pipeline company. You'll just have to fight your
problems out in court. How did the changes in
bankruptcy law in the late 70s change our
business?
Probably the largest single change is they gave
what we call in Chapter 11 presenting the debtor in
possession a lot greater latitude than they had in
previous years. For example, as companies began
to go into bankruptcy, previous years they could
be forced to sell their assets. And whatever they
get for them, they give it to their creditors. In
the late 70s, early 80s, Chapter 11 proceedings
under the bankruptcy code would give the debtor in
possession typically at least 18 months of
continued operation before he had to satisfy any
type of claims. At the end of 18 months, he had to
come into court with what we'd call a plan of
reorganization of saying, I'm going to pay off the
secured creditors $0.25 on the dollars. The
unsecured creditors, I'm going to give them $0.05
on the dollar, and so on. So debtor in possession
left the same management in the companies for much
longer periods of time than it had previously.
That was destructive to the industry? Oh, I don't
know that it was so destructive. It just changed
the way that you functioned in bankruptcy court.
We didn't go through near as many liquidations
after that particular change. I can't say that
it's good or bad. How did the changes in the tax law
in 1986 change the way we do business?
And was 1986 the end of the 70% windfall tax? Yes,
because when the price of oil went down, there was
no oil being taxed above that level, so there was no
need for a windfall profits tax, and it was phased
out. Some of the things that have hurt, they phased
out, maybe in the late 70s, early 80s, they phased
out depletion allowance for all major oil
companies. It had been 27.5% of gross income that
was not taxed. It went to 15%, and then they took it
to 0% for a major. Independence still had it. Then
they put in preference tax items where all
intangible drilling costs could not be deducted.
It had to be capitalized.
I don't think that the change in tax laws, it had an
impact, a negative impact on the industry, but not
an overwhelming impact. I mean, they could have
lived with, if that was all that had been the
problem. So the oil industry paid more taxes,
especially the big oil companies paid more taxes?
Yes. I mean, question, because they totally lost
their depletion
amounts. Have there been any debacles in foreign
policy that have really screwed up our industry?
It's hard to say. The accusation has been, and
there may be some element of proof, that during
Desert Storm, we were not really there, the
accusation is, to protect Kuwait. Because
Kuwait's got relatively few people, and there's a
lot more injustices that have been done to people
all over the world than there was in Kuwait. What we
were really over there for was to protect our oil
supply that was coming out of Saudi Arabia. I don't
think that there's been any evidence to support
it, but the allegation now from some corners is
that Saudi made a deal to continue to produce at
maximum rates since Desert Storm, since we sent
our people over there really to protect their
country. Them producing at maximum rate has
depressed the price of oil dramatically, and that
was their deal, is that they said, okay, if you'll
come over here and and protect us. We'll pump oil at
a maximum rate. The price of oil will stay way down.
You're importing a lot of oil, and that would be
good for the United States. It's very detrimental
to the petroleum industry, but probably very
favorable to the rest of the consumer.
I heard, as recently as last summer, that OPEC had
adopted a long-term strategy of keeping the price
of oil about $20. so that alternative energy
wouldn't develop and they could maintain a large
energy market share for the long term. Are they
abandoning that strategy now? Well, they
certainly have on the short term. OPEC and Saudi is
producing at a very high rate. They could run the
price of oil back up to $20 a barrel if they'd shut
back 5%. But in the past, Almost a year now, they
have not done it. Price of oil has been as low as $12,
$13 a barrel in the United States. Currently, the
posted price is $17. The actual field price is
probably about $15, $16. That's for West Texas?
Yes. What's going to happen when Iraq comes online
and then when the Soviet Union comes back online?
Well, let's talk about Iraq first. If Iraq comes on
and they can probably put as much as 3 million
barrels a day, if nobody else cuts back, price will
go to $10 a barrel.
If they were to come back on and OPEC kept their
production rate very high, price of oil will
plummet. Soviet Union will not come back on. I've
been in Russia for over two months. I've looked at
hundreds and hundreds of wells Their production
went from 12 million barrels down to 6.5 million
barrels. Over what time? Over about a four-year,
five-year period. The story that you read in the
paper is that these wells have minor mechanical
problems, and they just need a little help. And the
fact is that those wells have fatal flaw problems,
is that they've got poor quality pipe. Their
cement jobs are almost nonexistent. The only way
to fix those wells is to plug them and totally
re-drill them. The Soviet Union, to get their
production level back, probably needs a minimum
of $50 billion of drilling activity. Billion?
Billion. How much did you say we spent? We spent
$160 billion over a six-year period. And the
Soviet Union needs a minimum of $50 billion, and at
this point, on any joint ventures formed over
there, they've got a minimum of $6 a barrel tax on
it. So their tax rate is so high that they're simply
not economical to drill in Russia today. So
they're asking American producers to produce at
$6 a barrel? Well, to start with, the Americans in
the joint ventures are required to put up 100% of
the money. They only get half of the oil. Just to
start with, you're selling oil on the Black Sea for
$9 a barrel. You only get, I mean, for $18 a barrel,
you only get half of it. That's nine. It costs
$3 a barrel to transport it from Siberia, which is
their major producing area, to the Black Sea. So
that leaves you with six. Tax is $6 a barrel. That
leaves you with nothing. And we haven't even
talked about operating costs yet. So there's not a
lot of people rushing over there? No. Soviet
production is not going to go back to 10 to 12
million barrels a day, in my opinion, in the
foreseeable future. Should the federal
government do something to help oil companies get
in over there, or should they do something to keep
oil companies out? Well, I don't know whether it
should be the federal government's part.
worldwide economics dictate what should be done.
Obviously, if the government paves the way for big
infusions of capital into the Soviet Union, that
money is going to stay in the Soviet Union.
The problem with investments in the Soviet Union
is that we have not seen any type of proposal where
you're going to bring capital out of Russia.
Essentially, when you go over there and drill,
then you're going to reinvest your cash flow into
some type of Russia infrastructure, which is
going to be refining transportation type of
facilities. So in effect, you're exporting a lot
of US capital and a lot of US jobs to Russia, which
are going to be filled by Russians, not by
Americans. There seems to be a movement in a lot of
oil companies to produce abroad. Yes. And how does
that affect U.S. jobs, and how does that affect
U.S. tax revenue? Well, we obviously are
exporting jobs and exporting taxes to foreign
countries. It's just that simple. Because once
you spend the money over there, they're going to be
taxed over there. Those tax credits apply for U.S.
taxes. The U.S. might get some tax dollars, but it
would be greatly diminished from what we would if
it were generated in the United States. But also
those jobs are exported. When we go overseas and
you go out location, you look at production
facilities, at most you'll see 10% Americans.
You're going to see 90% of the people that are
working there are nationals, which is probably
what they should be. But that means you just
exported those jobs. You also export the support
people, which is the dry cleaner, the grocery
store, the filling station man. You export the
whole community overseas when you go into this
type of thing. What about equipment? Are we
exporting steel jobs? Is the steel coming from
somewhere else? No. Any country that is capable of
producing steel or has ties to another company
closer than they do to the United States will use
steel from there. For example, when you go into
Russia, you might bring in some steel from the
United States. But sooner or later, there's going
to be a deal. They'll have to get their steel up to
specs. They're going to insist on furnishing the
pipe themselves.
They're going to do as much for themselves as they
possibly can. What Russia wants from the United
States is one thing, money. They don't want our
technology. They don't want advice. They just
want money. They want to set up their own company.
That's correct. And you pay for it.
So what does the industry look like for the next
five years? Industry will continue. Domestic
industry will continue to go through downsizing.
We will lose probably in the neighborhood of eight
percent to ten percent of our workforce each year
the domestic budget will decline at the rate
currently running about 20 billion dollars a year
for production exploration it will decline also
at about that same rate so we'll probably get down
to a bedrock budget of around 10 billion dollars
compared to the current 20 billion dollars We're
essentially going to continue to go through
restructuring. Major oil companies will
continue to transfer oil properties by sales to
mid-sized to smaller independent companies.
Will those independents explore or will they just
produce? No, they'll just produce out what we've
got. There will be very little exploration. Do you
expect the number of independents to grow?
Probably.
There is a size really that is a more efficient
size. When you get too small, you don't have the
staff capability. Probably the most efficient
size of independent that is not going to explore is
in the range of $50 to $150 million in assets. That
means about how many people?
Counting field people in the neighborhood of 50 to
150 people. What
about long term, the next 40 years?